# MCIN
### Dynamic Functional Connectivity Decomposition - A benchmark for forecasting brain states under naturalistic stimuli
Tamires C. Marcal, Paule-Joanne Toussaint, Alan C. Evans
Affiliation: Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery, Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montréal, QC, H3A 2B4, Canada

Monitoring brain responses to naturalistic stimuli is a powerful way to understand brain circuit dynamics. Movie-watching paradigms offer rich, ecologically valid stimuli that capture complex temporal patterns of neural activity. However, current studies have yet to fully decompose brain signals during movie-watching using agnostic, data-driven approaches. We hypothesize that temporal dependencies on the signal create stable dynamic patterns, with prior Dynamic Functional Connectivity (DFC) of an individual serving as a predictor of their future brain states. We address this by decomposing the DFC and developing a forecast model of future brain states. We analyzed data from the Naturalistic Neuroimaging Database, derived from 86 participants who watched 10 full-length movies (average duration of 117 minutes). DFC was estimated using a sliding window approach, computing connectivity every 5 minutes with overlapping windows. An autoencoder was then applied to achieve DFC decomposition, followed by clustering to identify groups of similar connectivity patterns, referred to as brain states. Finally, to probe the stability of brain state dynamics, we forecasted the next 5 to 50minutes of brain activity based on previous states, latent components, movie, age, and gender. Our findings show that brain states were best obtained using 3–5 latent dimensions combined with 5–13 clusters, showing complete encoding of latent variables with high separation between brain states and low variation within them. When forecasting future brain states, the model showed a predictive power of 62.7% (±2.8%). The moving averages of the first three latent variables of the DFC decomposition emerged as the most important predictive features. These findings highlight that the DFC incorporated into the forecast model, captured both group-level and individual-specific brain dynamics. Our framework provides a new benchmark for modeling brain activity under naturalistic stimuli. Thus, it points the way for future research on temporal dependences and forecasts of brain operations.

### Outreach Component
Movies connect us to one another, offering new perspectives and shared experiences, from the fantastical to the unsettling. They also provide a unique window into how the brain responds to the world in real time. Using fMRI data collected during movie watching, we transform patterns of brain activity into computational models that reveal how regions link together as networks. In our project, we pair these networks with familiar movie scenes, creating an intuitive bridge between brain function and lived experience. Just as movie theatres bring people together, our work highlights the synchrony of brain networks across individuals. And because the work itself takes the form of a movie, watching it becomes a meta-experience — a film about films and the brain’s response to them. The accompanying posters display the name of each network alongside an artistic interpretation, further linking science and storytelling.

### Database Component
An outcome of this reserach is a collection of movie clips that strongly evoke a network from this list: Empathy; Theory of Mind; Reward; Cognitive Attention Control; Default Mode Network; Emotional Scene and Face.
